Functions

A function is a reusable block of code which performs operations specified in the function.
Once a function is defined, it can be used repeatedly. You can invoke the same function many times in your program. 
You can save your function and use it in another program or use someone else’s function

There are two types of functions:

Pre-defined functions
User defined functions

How to define a function in Python:

Functions blocks begin def followed by the function name and parentheses ().
There are input parameters or arguments that should be placed within these parentheses.
You can also define parameters inside these parentheses.
There is a body within every function that starts with a colon (:) and is indented.
You can also place documentation before the body.
The statement return exits a function, optionally passing back a value.

Example:

def function_name (parameters):
    function execution
    return parameters
    

def add(a):
    b = a + 1
    print(a, "if you add one", b)
    return(b)


Arguments / Parameters

Information can be passed into functions as arguments.
Arguments are specified after the function name, inside the parentheses.
You can add as many arguments as you want, separated by a comma.
Parameters in the funcion can be single or multiple, like this:

def sum (a, b):
    return a + b
    
This function sum parameter 'a' with parameter 'b' and returns the result

Parameters or Arguments?

The terms parameter and argument can be used for the same thing: information that are passed into a function.

From a function's perspective:
A parameter is the variable listed inside the parentheses in the function definition.
An argument is the value that is sent to the function when it is called.

By default, a function must be called with the correct number of arguments.
Meaning that if your function expects 2 arguments, you have to call the function with 2 arguments.
If you try to call the function with 1 or 3 arguments, you will get an error.

If you do not know how many arguments that will be passed into your function, add a '*' before the parameter name in the function definition.
This way the function will receive a tuple of arguments, and can access the items accordingly.
If you do not know how many keyword arguments that will be passed into your function, add two asterisk: '**' before the parameter name in the function definition.
This way the function will receive a dictionary of arguments, and can access the items accordingly



Calling a function
    
 
 We can call the function by the name with which we defined it
 
 add(1)
 
If we call the function with a new input we get a new result:

 add(2) 
 

Variables

The input to a function is called a formal parameter.
A variable that is declared inside a function is called a local variable.
The parameter only exists within the function (i.e. the point where the function starts and stops).

A variable that is declared outside a function definition is a global variable, and its value is accessible and modifiable throughout the program


Pre-defined functions

There are many pre-defined functions in Python:

print ( )

album_ratings = [10.0, 8.5, 9.5, 7.0, 7.0, 9.5, 9.0, 9.5] 
print(album_ratings)


sum ( )
This function adds all the elements in a list or tuple

sum(album_ratings)


len ( )
This function returns the length of a list or tuple

len(album_ratings)


return ( )
Thsi function ends function execution and specifies a value to be returned to the function caller

It is particularly useful if you have any IF statements in the function, when you want your output to be dependent on some condition:

def type_of_album(artist, album, year_released):
    
    print(artist, album, year_released)
    if year_released > 1980:
        return "Modern"
    else:
        return "Oldie"
    
x = type_of_album("Michael Jackson", "Thriller", 1980)
print(x)


Global Variables
In Python, a variable declared outside of the function or in global scope is known as a global variable. 
This means that a global variable can be accessed inside or outside of the function.

x = "global"

def demo():
    print("x inside:", x)


demo()
print("x outside:", x)

Output:

x inside: global
x outside: global

Wwe created x as a global variable and defined a demo() to print the global variable x. Finally, we call the demo() which will print the value of x.


Scope of a variable
The scope of a variable is the part of that program where that variable is accessible.
Variables that are declared outside of all function definitions are accessible from anywhere within the program.
As a result, such variables are said to have global scope, and are known as global variables.


Recursion

Python accepts function recursion, which means a defined function can call itself.
This has the benefit of meaning that you can loop through data to reach a result.

The developer should be very careful with recursion as it can be quite easy to slip into writing a function which never terminates,
or one that uses excess amounts of memory or processor power.
However, when written correctly recursion can be a very efficient and mathematically-elegant approach to programming.
